# https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.5.3.367

Bron: https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.5.3.367
Opgehaald: 2026-06-18

---

STATUS: OPGELOST - oorspronkelijke fetch gaf lege response (paywall/JavaScript-blokkade). Gebruiker heeft de PDF van dit artikel zelf aangeleverd ("McLean et al. - 2010 - Neuromuscular, Endocrine, and Perceptual Fatigue R.pdf"). Onderstaande tekst is de volledige, automatisch geëxtraheerde artikeltekst uit die PDF (incl. abstract, hoofdtekst en referenties); lay-out-artefacten van de originele kolomopmaak (bv. losse voetnootletters, doorlopende koppen) kunnen voorkomen maar de inhoud is compleet.

International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance, 2010, 5, 367-383
© Human Kinetics, Inc.

Neuromuscular, Endocrine, and Perceptual
   Fatigue Responses During Different
  Length Between-Match Microcycles in
   Professional Rugby League Players
             Blake D. McLean, Aaron J. Coutts, Vince Kelly,
             Michael R. McGuigan, and Stuart J. Cormack

     Introduction: The purpose of this study was to examine the changes in neuro-
     muscular, perceptual and hormonal measures following professional rugby league
     matches during different length between-match microcycles. Methods: Twelve
     professional rugby league players from the same team were assessed for changes
     in countermovement jump (CMJ) performance (flight time and relative power),
     perceptual responses (fatigue, well-being and muscle soreness) and salivary hor-
     mone (testosterone [T] and cortisol [C]) levels during 5, 7 and 9 d between-match
     training microcycles. All training was prescribed by the club coaches and was
     monitored using the session-RPE method. Results: Lower mean daily training load
     was completed on the 5 d compared with the 7 and 9 d microcycles. CMJ flight time
     and relative power, perception of fatigue, overall well-being and muscle soreness
     were significantly reduced in the 48 h following the match in each microcycle (P
     < .05). Most CMJ variables returned to near baseline values following 4 d in each
     microcycle. Countermovement jump relative power was lower in the 7 d microcycle
     in comparison with the 9 d microcycle (P < .05). There was increased fatigue at
     48 h in the 7 and 9 d microcycles (P < .05) but had returned to baseline in the 5 d
     microcycle. Salivary T and C did not change in response to the match. Discussion:
     Neuromuscular performance and perception of fatigue are reduced for at least 48
     h following a rugby league match but can be recovered to baseline levels within
     4 d. These findings show that with appropriate training, it is possible to recover
     neuromuscular and perceptual measures within 4 d after a rugby league match.

     Keywords: neuromuscular fatigue, testosterone, cortisol, team sport, monitoring

Blake D. McLean is with the School of Leisure, Sport and Tourism, University of Technology, Sydney,
Lindfield, New South Wales, Australia, and with the South Sydney Rugby League Football Club,
Redfern, New South Wales, Australia. Aaron J. Coutts is with the School of Leisure, Sport and Tour-
ism, University of Technology, Sydney, Lindfield, New South Wales, Australia. Vince Kelly is with the
South Sydney Rugby League Football Club, Redfern, New South Wales, Australia, and with the School
of Human Movement Studies, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland, Australia. Michael R.
McGuigan is with the New Zealand Academy of Sport, Auckland, New Zealand and with the Auckland
University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand. Stuart J. Cormack is with the Essendon Football
Club, Essendon, Victoria, Australia.

368   McLean et al.

     It is well established that professional athletes need to train at high-intensity
to elicit improvements in skill and all qualities of physical fitness relating to that
particular sport,1 it is also understood that too much high-intensity training, without
adequate recovery periods, will have a detrimental effect on performance.2 However,
there is still relatively little research that has examined the efficacy of methods
for monitoring player fatigue and recovery, especially in high performance team
sport athletes.3–10 An accumulation of fatigue or incomplete recovery can have a
large influence on performance, especially during periods of regular competition.
If player fatigue and recovery is not managed appropriately, team sport athletes
may be at greater risk of underperformance.
     Professional rugby league is played on a regular week to week basis, over a long
season, and it can be difficult to balance appropriate training and recovery strate-
gies.11 Although it has been identified that monitoring levels of fatigue is important,
there is currently limited research examining the most appropriate methods to do
this in professional rugby league players. The only available research relating to
fatigue in rugby league has examined deliberately overreached athletes.3,6,12 Coutts
et al6 reported significant reductions in aerobic capacity and hamstring torque in 7
semiprofessional rugby league players after 6 wk of progressive overload training
with limited recovery periods. However, no investigations have examined how team
sport athletes react to differing length in-season microcycles.
     A number of nonfatiguing performance measures and biochemical markers are
suggested to be useful in regular monitoring team sport athletes.5,7 These measures
have been shown to be effective in detecting fatigue in deliberately overreached
athletes.6,12,13 Coutts et al13 found a 7.9% decrease in five bound horizontal jump test
for distance and an increase in stress reaction symptoms after 4 wk of intensified
training in sixteen male triathletes. There are however, relatively few studies examin-
ing the usefulness of these measures during a team sport season when athletes are
not deliberately overreached, but may be experiencing symptoms associated with
the early stages of overreaching.5,7,14–16 Early detection of these subtle symptoms
may allow coaches to intervene and avoid the detrimental effects associated with
maladaptive training.
     Therefore, the purpose of this research was to examine the changes in neuro-
muscular fatigue, perceptual fatigue and salivary hormones in professional rugby
league players during the in-season period. A further aim of this study was to
examine differences in these fatigue measures during different length recovery
periods between matches.

                                    Methods
Subjects
Twelve professional rugby league players (age: 24.3 ± 3.6 y, body mass: 101.9 ±8.4
kg, stature: 184.7 ± 6.1 cm, sum of 7 skinfolds: 66.0 ± 12.0 mm, playing experi-
ence: 69 ± 65 National Rugby League [NRL] matches) representing the South
Sydney Rabbitohs NRL team volunteered to participate in this study. All subjects
were given a verbal and written description of the procedures and possible risks
before participation. Each subject completed a voluntary written consent form and
the study was approved by a university human ethics review panel.

                   Monitoring Recovery from Professional Rugby League Matches      369

Research Design
This study examined the neuromuscular, endocrine and perceptual fatigue responses
during three different duration training weeks throughout a 26 wk rugby league
season. Subjects were familiarized with all experimental protocols before the com-
mencement of the study period. The three experimental weeks consisted of 5 d, 7 d
and 9 d between-match periods. Experimental weeks were completed at weeks 3, 7
and 18 of the 2008 NRL season for the 9, 5 and 7 d recovery periods respectively.
All 12 subjects were assessed in each microcycle.

Performance Measures
Baseline countermovement jumps (CMJ) were examined at the end of a preseason
taper period. The timing of these measures was selected as the training load had
been reduced to recover the players before competition. These CMJ values were
then compared with CMJ performance 1 d postmatch, 4 d postmatch and the day
before the following match (for 7 and 9 d experimental weeks only). All CMJs were
completed at a standard time between 8:00 to 10:00, before commencing training.
Before beginning the CMJs, subjects performed a standardized 5 min dynamic warm-
up, similar to that previously described.8 This warm-up used a number of different
running patterns at increasing intensity and dynamic stretches followed by three
submaximal practice jumps. The players then performed a single CMJ. The CMJs
were performed with hands held firmly on the hips and subjects were instructed to
jump as high as possible. All jumps were performed at a self-selected countermove-
ment depth and no instruction was given on what countermovement depth to use.
     All CMJs were performed on a force plate (400 Series Performance Plate, Fit-
ness Technology, Adelaide, Australia) connected to a computer running software
(Ballistic Measurement System, Fitness Technology, Adelaide, Australia) that
recorded vertical ground reaction forces at 200 Hz. Relative Power (CMJRelP) and
Flight time (CMJFT) of each jump was assessed using custom-designed software,
capable of automatically detecting these variables (Mathworks, Natick, Massachu-
setts, USA). These CMJ variables have previously5,7,8 been described and have been
shown to be reliable8 and useful in detecting low frequency fatigue in team sport
athletes.5,7 Subjective feelings of fatigue: During the study period athletes completed
a custom-made psychological questionnaire that was based on the recommendations
of Hooper et al.17 The questionnaire assessed their fatigue, sleep quality, general
muscle soreness, stress levels and mood on a five-point scale (scores of 1 to 5, 0.5
point increments; see Figure 1). Overall well-being was then determined by sum-
ming the five scores. The well-being questionnaire (WB) was completed 4 h before
the first match, and then 1, 2, 4, 5*, 6*, 7*, 8* and 9* d following (*depending
on microcycle). The well-being questionnaires were completed immediately after
giving the saliva sample at the prescribed time (8:00 or 11:00) on experimental days.

Physiological Measures
Endocrine responses to matches and training were measured through salivary
analysis. Saliva collection involved players passively drooling directly into a 20
mL plastic tube (Model SCP5014GL, Bacto Laboratories, Mt Pritchard, Austra-
lia). Samples were then sealed with a plastic screw-top lid and frozen at −20°C

      Figure 1 — The well-being review sheet that was completed during the study.

                   Monitoring Recovery from Professional Rugby League Matches       371

until analysis. Athletes were asked to maintain their normal diet throughout the
study period and ingest only water 30 min before providing the saliva sample.
Saliva samples were collected from the players 4 h prematch and 1 d, 2 d, and 4 d
postmatch in all three experimental weeks. Sample collection after 4 d postmatch
varied depending on the experimental week. Sample collection times on the three
experimental weeks are shown in Figure 2. All saliva samples were collected at
08:00 to keep diurnal variations constant at the time of collection; this is with the
exception of samples collected on match days. All samples collected on match days
were collected at 11:00 as to not disrupt athletes sleeping patterns on match day.
Therefore it is possible that changes in timing of saliva sample collection on match
day may have influenced these hormonal measures as the release of testosterone

Figure 2 — Data collection timeline for the 5 d, 7 d and 9 d microcycles. CMJ = counter-
movement jump, WB = well-being questionnaire.

372   McLean et al.

and cortisol is affected by circadian rhythm. All samples were analyzed together
upon the completion of the experimental period to minimize intra-assay variability.
     Cortisol (mg/dL) and testosterone (pg/mL) were determined in duplicate by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (Salimetrics, PA, USA) using a microplate
reader (SpectraMax 190, Molecular Devices, CA, USA). The coefficient of varia-
tion as a percent of the assays was 7.3% and 2.4% for testosterone and cortisol,
respectively.

Physical Training
All participants took part in normal team training, prescribed by coaches and
strength and conditioning staff. Training was not altered in any way for the purposes
of this study. Table 1 provides a general description of the training content completed
in each microcycle. The training loads for each experimental week were recorded
using methods described by Foster et al.9 This method calculates a total training
load (arbitrary units [AU]) by multiplying the session-RPE by the session time.

Statistical Analyses
To eliminate the variation of individual patterns and fluctuations of all measures
(performance, psychological and hormonal), all raw data were converted to a
Z-score calculated for each individual player before analyses. A Z-score expresses
a score in terms of the number of standard deviation units the raw score is below or
above the mean of the distribution and is calculated using the following formula:
(individual players score—individual players average)/individual players standard
deviation (SD). The Z-scores for CMJ variables, cortisol and testosterone were
calculated using all data points collected from each player over the study period,
including baseline measures. As the same perceptual measures had been recorded
extensively in this group of athletes before the study commencing, perceptual fatigue
Z-scores were calculated from all available data for each player, this ranged from
six months to two years of baseline data. A two-way univariate ANOVA was used
to examine main effects for microcycle (5 d, 7 d and 9 d) and time (time course
changes). Within (time course changes) and between microcycle (5 d, 7 d and 9 d)
post hoc analysis and training load measures were analyzed using one-way ANOVA.
Effect size (ES) statistics were calculated using Cohen’s d and eta squared (h2)
statistics. Values of 0.2, 0.5 and >0.8 were considered small, moderate and large,
respectively. An alpha (a) level of < 0.05 was used as the criterion for significance.
Statistical analyses were performed using the software package SPSS (version
15.0). All data are mean ±SD.

                                     Results
Figure 3A shows mean (± SD) relative daily training load performed in each of the
different microcycles. Significantly higher mean daily load was found in the 7 d (P
< .05, d = 0.45) and 9 d (P < .01, d = 0.59) microcycles when compared with the
5 d microcycle. Figure 3B shows mean (± SD) overall training load performed in
each of the different experimental microcycles. A higher overall training load was
found in the 9 d microcycle when compared with the 5 d (P < .001, d = 0.95) and

      Table 1 General description of training content and daily training load (in arbitrary units; mean ± SD) during
      each of the microcycles
      Microcycle
      and Time          Day 0       Day 1      Day 2          Day 3          Day 4         Day 5        Day 6     Day 7      Day 8      Day 9

      Five Days
        AM                         Recovery                   Skills/
                                                             Strength
        PM              Match                                                Skills        Match
      Training load:   421 ± 173   118 ± 24      —           395 ± 81       244 ± 55     475 ± 196

      Seven Days
        AM                         Recovery   Skills/     Skills/Contact/                 Speed/        Skills
                                              Weights      Conditioning                    Skills
        PM              Match                                                             Weights                 Match
      Training load:   411 ± 213   94 ± 15    388 ± 163     389 ± 180          —         386 ± 107      151 ± 1 412 ± 196

      Nine Days
        AM                         Recovery                                 Weights/    Conditioning/            Speed/      Skills
                                                                             Skills       Contact                Weights
        PM              Match                                                Skills                               Skills                Match
      Training load:   411 ± 217   96 ± 15       —              —           733 ± 118    478 ± 271        —      539 ± 77   166 ± 33   437 ± 172

374   McLean et al.

Figure 3 — (A) Daily training load for the different between-match microcycles. (B) Total
training load during the different between-match microcycles (all mean ± SD). aDifferent
from 9 d and 7 d microcycles. bDifferent from 7 d microcycle. cDifferent from 5 d microcycle.
d
  Different from 9 d microcycle (all P < .05).

7 d (P < .001, d = 0.69) microcycles and significantly higher overall training load
in the 7 d microcycle when compared with the 5 d microcycle (P < .001, d = 0.81).
The mean weekly training load during the 6 wk before testing was significantly
lower in the 7 d microcycle (1309 ± 436 AU) compared with the 5- (1704 ± 419
AU) and 9 day (1862 ± 552 AU) microcycles (P < .02).
     Figure 4A shows the time course of change of CMJFT measures. Baseline CMJFT
values were significantly higher than day 1 (P < .001, d = 1.67) and the day before
the match at the end of the training microcycle (P < .05, d = 1.12). Baseline CMJFT
also tended to be higher than day 4 measures with values approaching significance
(P = .08, d = 0.96). Day 1 CMJFT measures were significantly lower than day 4 (P
< .01, d = −1.06) and the day before the match at the end of the training microcycle
(P < .05, d = 1.06).

                    Monitoring Recovery from Professional Rugby League Matches           375

     The CMJRelP was significantly lower overall in the 7 d microcycle when
compared with the 9 d microcycle (P < .05, d = −0.94) and baseline (P < .05, d =
−0.38) (Figure 4B). Furthermore, CMJRelP tended to be reduced on day 4 in the 7 d
microcycle, compared with day 4 in the 9 d microcycle (P = .06, d = −1.21). The
CMJRelP at the end of each microcycle tended to be reduced in the 7 d compared
with the 9 d microcycle, although differences were not significant, a moderate
effect size observed (d = −0.76). There were no significant changes in body mass
between the Baseline (101.9 ± 8.4 kg), 5 d (103.3 ± 7.3 kg), 7 d (105.1 ± 7.8 kg),
and 9 d (101.3 ± 9.6 kg) microcycles (P = .55).

Figure 4 — (A) CMJ flight time for the different between-match microcycles. (B) CMJ
relative power the different between-match microcycles. aDenotes significantly different from
day 1 and day before following match with all microcycles combined. bDenotes significantly
different from day 4 and day before following match with all microcycles combined. cDif-
ferent between the 7 and 9 d microcycles, all mean ± SD.

376   McLean et al.

     Figure 5A show that fatigue levels were significantly worse 1 d following
the match for each training cycle (P < .01, d = −1.65). Fatigue levels tended to
be lower at day 2 postmatch from prematch levels in the 7 d week (P = .13, d
= −1.42), and were significantly reduced in the 9 d microcycle (P < .001, d =
−1.75). Fatigue levels returned to near prematch values day 4 in all three experi-
mental weeks. On day 6 in the 9 d microcycle the fatigue levels were significantly
lower (P < .05, d = −1.31) than the following match day values in this week.
Significantly lower fatigue levels were reported in the 5 d week when compared
with both the 7 d (P < .01, d = 0.45) and the 9 d (P < .01, d = 0.36) microcycles.
Fatigue levels on day 2 following the match were significantly less on the 5 d
week when compared with 7 d week (P < .05, d = 1.27) and the 9 d week (P
< .01, d = 1.67). Subjects also tended to exhibit more fatigue on the following
match day in the 7 d microcycle as compared with the 9 d microcycle, with a
moderate effect size (d = −0.67).
     Figure 5B shows that overall well-being was significantly reduced at 1 d
postmatch for all microcycles (P < .01, d = −1.64) and remained significantly
reduced 2 d following the match in the 7 d (P < .05, d = −1.53) and 9 d (P < .01, d
= −0.18) microcycles. Overall well-being measured 2 d following the match was
significantly higher in the 5 d microcycle compared with the 7 d (P < .05, d = 1.36)
and 9 d microcycle (P < .01, d = 1.66). Overall well-being was also significantly
higher on the 5 d microcycle when compared with the 7 d (P < .05, d = 0.34) and
9 d (P < .01, d = 0.36) microcycles.
     Figure 5C shows the changes in general muscle soreness during each of the
different training microcycles. Overall, players endured less muscle soreness
(higher mean values) in the 5 d microcycle compared with both the 7 d (P < .01,
d = 1.46) and 9 d (P < .05, d = 1.56) microcycles. General muscle soreness was
increased (decreased scores), compared with prematch values, 1 d postmatch in
5 d (P < .01, d = −1.57) and 9 d (P < .01, d = −1.36) experimental microcycles.
General muscle soreness also tended to increase 1 d postmatch in the 7 d micro-
cycle with values approaching significance (P = .07, d = −1.26). This remained
elevated for 2 d postmatch in the 7 d microcycle (P < .05, d = −1.44) and also
tended to remain elevated in the 9 d microcycle with values approaching signifi-
cance (P = .07, d = −1.44). In the 5 d microcycle general muscle soreness had
returned to prematch values on day 2 and was significantly less when compared
with the 7 d (P < .01, d = 1.46) and 9 d (P ≤ .05, d = 1.56) microcycles on this
day. General muscle soreness values returned to prematch values after 4 d in all
experimental microcycles. However, these general muscle soreness tended to
increase 6 d postmatch in the 9 d microcycle, with values approaching significance
(P = .07, d = −1.36).
     Figure 6A shows the time course of change of cortisol, testosterone and T:C
ratio over the three different in-season microcycles. Day 4 cortisol measures in the 9
day and 7 d microcycles were significantly higher than game day (P < .01, d = 0.60)
and tended to be higher than day 1 measures with values approaching significance
(P = .07, d = 0.69). Cortisol concentrations on day 4 tended to be lower in the 5
d microcycle when compared with the 9 d (d = −0.51) and 7 d microcycles (d =
−0.71). No differences were found in testosterone or T:C ratio within microcycles
or between experimental microcycles.

                    Monitoring Recovery from Professional Rugby League Matches           377

Figure 5 — (A) Fatigue during the different between-match microcycles. (B) Overall WB
during the different between-match microcycles. (C) General muscle soreness during the
different between-match microcycles (all mean ± SD). aDifferent from previous measure for
all microcycles. bDifferent from the 7 and 9 d microcycles. cDifferent from day 6. dDifferent
from previous measure in the same microcycle (all P < .05).

378   McLean et al.

Figure 6 — (A) Cortisol during the different between-match microcycles. (B) Testosterone
during the different between-match microcycles. (C) Testosterone-to-cortisol ratio during
the different between-match microcycles (all mean ± SD). aDifferent from day 0 in the 7
d and 9 d microcycles.

                   Monitoring Recovery from Professional Rugby League Matches     379

                                 Discussion
The purpose of this study was to examine the time course of change in neuromus-
cular, psychological and physiological markers of fatigue following a professional
rugby league match. An additional purpose was to distinguish any differences in
the recovery of these athletes over different length between-match microcycles.
Results showed that CMJ performance is reduced postmatch but returns to its highest
in-season levels 4 d postmatch. Results also show that the psychological variables
can detect changes in fatigue and muscle soreness. These findings suggest that
regular analyses of both CMJs and psychological questionnaires are useful tools
in monitoring in-season fatigue in professional rugby league players.
     The training loads completed in this study were slightly lower than previ-
ous research examining a professional rugby league team competing in the same
competition as the club in this study.4 In the current study, there was a lower daily
training load in the 5 d microcycle compared with the 7 d and 9 d microcycles.
This reduction in load was most likely due to the coaching staff focus on optimiz-
ing recovery by reducing the physical training when a shorter recovery period
was available. Interestingly, the mean daily training load in the 7 d and 9 d weeks
were not significantly different (see Figure 2). Despite this, each of the training
microcycles elicited subtly different recovery profiles in the neuromuscular and
psychological measures. These results show that careful titration of training load
is important for neuromuscular and perceptual recovery from professional rugby
league match play.
     The CMJFT was significantly reduced in the 24 h following the first match in
each training cycle. These results agree with Cormack et al,7 who showed that both
CMJFT was reduced in the days following competition. The present findings also
support other studies which have shown CMJ performance to decrease following
strenuous athletic competition7,10,18 and intensified training.19 Paradoxically, there
were no significant within microcycle changes in CMJRelP measurements following
the initial postmatch reduction (from preseason levels) for any of the training micro-
cycles. However, although no changes were observed during the training microcycles,
the power measurements showed differences between each of the microcycles. For
example, CMJRelP was significantly reduced throughout the 7 d microcycle when
compared with the 9 d microcycle. These results support recent theories that suggest
power measures might be more useful in monitoring long term, low frequency fatigue
(LFF).20 On the basis of these findings we suggest that future studies examine the CMJ
power variables that may be a useful for monitoring LFF in rugby league players.
     A notable finding in this study was that the CMJRelP measurements in the 7 d
microcycle were consistently lower than the 9 d microcycle. This finding, coupled
with the high relative training load in the 7 d microcycle, suggests that the players
had greater neuromuscular fatigue, most likely as a result of an inappropriate train-
ing dose. The high training dose within the 7 d microcycle is likely to have affected
neuromuscular status; however, it is also possible that inappropriate training in the
weeks before this training microcycle or subtle changes in training content during
each of the microcycles may have had an effect on the neuromuscular status of
the athletes. In this study the mean weekly training for the 6 wk before the test-
ing week was lowest for the 7 d microcycle and highest in the 9 d microcycles,
suggesting cumulative training load in the weeks before each testing period was

380   McLean et al.

not responsible for the acute changes in CMJRelP. Collectively, however, the present
and previous5,7 results indicate that neuromuscular fatigue in football players can be
monitored via CMJ variables that include flight time and power. It is possible that
these measures may be used to assess the time course of recovery following a match,
the neuromuscular recovery between matches, and LFF that may occur during a
training season. Future studies should examine the CMJ variables, throughout differ-
ent training microcycles, under more strictly controlled experimental microcycles.
     Similar to the neuromuscular performance measures, there was an increase in
the player’s fatigue and muscle soreness and poorer overall well-being following
each match which improved in the days following. In addition, the player’s percep-
tion of overall well-being returned to near baseline levels within 4 d following the
match in each training cycle. Previous research has shown changes in an athlete’s
perception of well-being and fatigue often occur concurrently with maladaptive
training.3,13,21–24 In this study, there was an increase in fatigue in the 7 d microcycle,
when relative daily training load was greater, and subtle increases in fatigue were
detected in the days following heavy training within a microcycle. For example,
there was an increase in fatigue levels on day 6 in the 9 d microcycle following 2
d of heavy training on days 4 and 5.
     General muscle soreness measures also showed important changes within each
of the different training microcycles and may have important practical implications.
The return to baseline values in general muscle soreness during the 5 d microcycle
was accelerated compared the 7 and 9 d microcycles. This rapid recovery occurred
despite the same training being completed on day 1 postmatch in all three experi-
mental weeks. This suggests that optimal recovery of perception of general muscle
soreness following a match is affected by many variables such as adaptation to
previous training, the extent of damage that occurred during match play and is not
limited to the type and amount of training completed in the days following com-
petition. Interestingly, a similar pattern also occurred with the Fatigue and overall
well-being scores providing further support for this simple psychometric tool for
assessing recovery from training and matches in rugby league.
     In the current study, changes in salivary cortisol and testosterone were moni-
tored to examine alterations in the player’s anabolic/catabolic balance during the
different training microcycles. The testosterone measures were highly variable and
there were no changes within or between each of the different training microcycles.
Due to the variable nature of testosterone, the T:C ratio was also highly variable and
did not appear to be influenced by changes in training loads and/or competition.
These results agree with Cormack et al7 who reported that testosterone or T:C ratio
did not change in the days following a preseason ARF match.
     There were also large variations in cortisol during the study; however, there was
a small postmatch reduction for 24 to 48 h and then an increase until 4 d following
the match in each microcycle. In contrast to the present results, one previous study
has shown salivary cortisol to increase 24 h after an ARF match.7 The current find-
ing of a reduced cortisol for 24 h following a match agrees with previous research
that reported small decreases in morning cortisol levels in the days following an
international rugby union match14 and a 3 d wrestling competition.25 In the current
study, there was also a tendency for lower cortisol response in the 5 d microcycle
compared with the 7 d and 9 d microcycles. The lower mean daily training load in
this microcycle is the most probable explanation for the lower stress response. No

                   Monitoring Recovery from Professional Rugby League Matches      381

other study has reported salivary cortisol to be elevated to its highest values several
days following a match. In contrast to these previous results, and the results from
the current study, Cormack et al7 found salivary cortisol to increase to its highest
recorded values 1 d after an ARF match followed by a decline the lowest values
following 4 d. The differences in research design between the present and previous
studies7 makes accurate interpretation of results difficult.
     Many physiological and psychological factors can influence cortisol response.
Clearly a limitation of this study, from a research design perspective, is the uncon-
trolled training environment in which the data are collected. Although this makes
interpretation of changes in variables difficult, there is a high level of ecological
validity in the findings. More applied training/recovery interventions in the field,
with high level athletes are required so that factors affecting athlete performance
in the competitive environment are better understood.

                                   Summary
The present investigation showed that neuromuscular and perceptual fatigue mea-
sures are reduced 24 h following a professional rugby league match and can return to
baseline values within 4 d of competition. Current results also show that the place-
ment of training within each between match microcycle is important for appropriate
recovery from rugby league matches. Perception of fatigue and muscle soreness
and CMJ performance were affected by stress of professional rugby league match
play and also the training content within each microcycle. The CMJFT appeared to
be useful for assessing acute fatigue caused by a match, while the CMJRelP was dif-
ferent between each of the microcycles suggesting that it may be suited to monitor
for accumulated, LFF fatigue. Psychometric measurements taken in this study were
sensitive to acute fatigue during each training week, with subtle changes in training
load eliciting changes in the player’s perception of muscle soreness and general
fatigue. In addition, the perceptual fatigue responses were also consistently lower
when a high daily training load was performed throughout a training microcycle.
Collectively, these results suggest that small changes to relative in-season training
load, within professional rugby league, may have a significant impact on player’s
neuromuscular and psychometric fatigue status. The current study shows that both
CMJs and psychological questionnaires can be useful for monitoring fatigue in
team sports such as rugby league. Specifically, these measures can show unique
recovery profiles that appear to follow training load and this makes them useful for
assessing player recovery between games in professional rugby league.

Practical Applications
This study was conducted in a real training environment with top level professional
rugby league players which allows for several important practical findings to be
made. The current findings are important as they show that inappropriate training
loads within a between-match microcycle can negatively impact on neuromuscular
status, perception of fatigue and muscle soreness. Psychological questionnaires
provide a simple and cost-effective monitoring tool for coaches and should be
implemented on a regular basis throughout a team sport season. We suggest that
coaches and scientists can flag values that are greater than one Z-score from their

382   McLean et al.

individual mean for further follow-up. In agreement with recent studies,5,7 we also
suggest that coaches should perform weekly analyses of CMJ power measurements,
and use these results in conjunction with psychometric variables to adjust between
match training loads so that performance can be optimized.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the players and management of the South Sydney Rabbi-
tohs Rugby League Football Club for their enthusiastic participation in this study. Special
thanks are extended to Errol Allcott and Grant Duthie for their assistance with this project.
This research was supported by a grant from the South Sydney Rabbitohs Rugby League
Football Club.

                                    References
 1. Smith DJ. A framework for understanding the training process leading to elite perfor-
    mance. Sports Med. 2003;33(15):1103–1126.
 2. Rowbottom DG. Periodization of training. In: Garret J, W.E., Kirkendall DT, eds. Exer-
    cise and Sport Science. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 2000:499–514.
 3. Coutts AJ, Reaburn PRJ. Monitoring changes in stress and recovery during overreach-
    ing in rugby league players. Percept Mot Skills. 2008;106(3):904–916.
 4. Coutts AJ, Charmari K, Rampinini E, Impellizzeri FM. Contrôle et suivi de l’entraînement
    : périodisationet charges d’entraînement. In: Dellal A, ed. De Lentraînement à la Per-
    formance en Football. Paris, France: De Boeck Universite; 2008:242–263.
 5. Cormack SJ, Newton RU, McGuigan MR, Cormie P. Neuromuscular and endocrine
    responses of elite players during an Australian rules football season. Int J Sports Physiol
    Perform. 2008;3(4):439–453.
 6. Coutts A, Reaburn P, Piva TJ, Murphy A. Changes in selected biochemical, muscular
    strength, power, and endurance measures during deliberate overreaching and tapering
    in rugby league players. Int J Sports Med. 2007;28(2):116–124.
 7. Cormack SJ, Newton RU, McGuigan MR. Neuromuscular and endocrine responses
    of elite players to an Australian Rules Football match. Int J Sports Physiol Perform.
    2008;3(3):359–374.
 8. Cormack SJ, Newton RU, McGuigan MR, Doyle TLA. Reliability of measures obtained
    during single and repeated countermovement jumps. Int J Sports Physiol Perform.
    2008;3(2):131–144.
 9. Foster C, Florhaug JA, Franklin J, et al. A new approach to monitoring exercise train-
    ing. J Strength Cond Res. 2001;15(1):109–115.
10. Hoffman JR, Nusse V, Kang J. The effect of an intercollegiate soccer game on maximal
    power performance. Can J Appl Physiol. 2003;28(6):807–817.
11. Coutts AJ, Sirotic AC, Knowles H, Catterick C. Monitoring Training Loads in Profes-
    sional Rugby League. In: Reilly T, Korkusuz F, eds. Science and Football VI. London,
    UK: Routledge; 2008:1–6.
12. Coutts AJ, Reaburn P, Piva TJ, Rowsell GJ. Monitoring for overreaching in rugby
    league players. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2007;99(3):313–324.
13. Coutts AJ, Slattery KM, Wallace LK. Practical tests for monitoring performance, fatigue
    and recovery in triathletes. J Sci Med Sport. 2007;10(6):372–381.
14. Elloumi M, Maso F, Michaux O, Robert A, Lac G. Behaviour of saliva cortisol [C],
    testosterone [T] and the T/C ratio during a rugby match and during the post-competition
    recovery days. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2003;90(1-2):23–28.

                   Monitoring Recovery from Professional Rugby League Matches           383

15. Filaire E, Bernain X, Sagnol M, Lac G. Preliminary results on mood state, salivary
    testosterone:cortisol ratio and team performance in a professional soccer team. Eur J
    Appl Physiol. 2001;86(2):179–184.
16. Filaire E, Lac G, Pequignot JM. Biological, hormonal, and psychological parameters
    in professional soccer players throughout a competitive season. Percept Mot Skills.
    2003;97(3 Pt 2):1061–1072.
17. Hooper SL, Mackinnon LT. Monitoring overtraining in athletes: recommendations.
    Sports Med. 1995;20(5):321–327.
18. Petersen K, Hansen CB, Aagaard P, Madsen K. Muscle mechanical characteristics in
    fatigue and recovery from a marathon race in highly trained runners. Eur J Appl Physiol.
    2007;101(3):385–396.
19. Minetto MA, Lanfranco F, Tibaudi A, Baldi M, Termine A, Ghigo E. Changes in
    awakening cortisol response and midnight salivary cortisol are sensitive markers of
    strenuous training-induced fatigue. J Endocrinol Invest. 2008;31(1):16–24.
20. Fowles JR. Technical Issues in Quantifying Low-Frequency Fatigue in Athletes. Int J
    Sports Physiol Perform. 2006;1:169–171.
21. Lambert MI, Borresen J. A theoretical basis of monitoring fatigue: A practical approach
    for coaches. Int J Sports Sci Coaching. 2006;1(4):371–387.
22. Morgan WP, Brown DR, Raglin JS, O’Connor PJ, Ellickson KA. Psychological moni-
    toring of overtraining and staleness. Br J Sports Med. 1987;21(3):107–114.
23. WP, Costill DL, Flynn MG, Raglin JS, O’Connor PJ. Mood disturbance following
    increased training in swimmers. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1988;20(4):408–414.
24. Urhausen A, Gabriel HHW, Brukner F, Kindermann W. Effects of two training phases
    of different intensities on exercise-induced hormonal response and psychological
    parameters in endurance athletes. Int J Sports Med. 1998;19:s43–s44.
25. Passelergue P, Lac G. Saliva cortisol, testosterone and T/C ratio variations during a
    wrestling competition and during the post-competitive recovery period. Int J Sports
    Med. 1999;20(2):109–113.

Copyright of International Journal of Sports Physiology & Performance is the property of Human Kinetics
Publishers, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

