# https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2021-0024

Bron: https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2021-0024
Opgehaald: 2026-06-18

---

STATUS: OPGELOST - oorspronkelijke fetch gaf lege response (paywall/JavaScript-blokkade). Gebruiker heeft de PDF van dit artikel zelf aangeleverd ("Roete et al. - 2021 - A Systematic Review on Markers of Functional Overr.pdf"). Onderstaande tekst is de volledige, automatisch geëxtraheerde artikeltekst uit die PDF (incl. abstract, hoofdtekst en referenties); lay-out-artefacten van de originele kolomopmaak (bv. losse voetnootletters, doorlopende koppen) kunnen voorkomen maar de inhoud is compleet.

University of Groningen

A Systematic Review on Markers of Functional Overreaching in Endurance Athletes
Roete, Annemiek J.; Elferink-Gemser, Marije T.; Otter, Ruby T. A.; Stoter, Inge K.; Lamberts,
Robert P.
Published in:
International journal of sports physiology and performance

DOI:
10.1123/ijspp.2021-0024

IMPORTANT NOTE: You are advised to consult the publisher's version (publisher's PDF) if you wish to cite from
it. Please check the document version below.

Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record

Publication date:

Link to publication in University of Groningen/UMCG research database

      Citation for published version (APA):
      Roete, A. J., Elferink-Gemser, M. T., Otter, R. T. A., Stoter, I. K., & Lamberts, R. P. (2021). A Systematic
      Review on Markers of Functional Overreaching in Endurance Athletes. International journal of sports
      physiology and performance, 16(8), 1065-1073. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2021-0024

Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the
author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license (like Creative Commons).

The publication may also be distributed here under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license.
More information can be found on the University of Groningen website: https://www.rug.nl/library/open-access/self-archiving-pure/taverne-
amendment.

Take-down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.

Downloaded from the University of Groningen/UMCG research database (Pure): http://www.rug.nl/research/portal. For technical reasons the
number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum.

Download date: 19-10-2022

International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance, 2021, 16, 1065-1073
https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2021-0024
© 2021 Human Kinetics, Inc.                                                                                                                       BRIEF REVIEW

       A Systematic Review on Markers of Functional Overreaching
                         in Endurance Athletes
   Annemiek J. Roete, Marije T. Elferink-Gemser, Ruby T.A. Otter, Inge K. Stoter, and Robert P. Lamberts

     Purpose: The aim of this brief review was to present an overview of noninvasive markers in trained to professional endurance
     athletes that can reﬂect a state of functional overreaching. Methods: A systematic literature search was conducted in the PubMed,
     Scopus, and PsycINFO databases. After screening 380 articles, 12 research papers were included for the systematic review.
     Results: Good consensus was found between the different papers in which noninvasive parameters were able to reﬂect a state of
     functional overreaching. Changes in power output (PO), heart rate (HR; [sub]maximal and HR recovery), rating of perceived
     exertion, and scores in the Daily Analysis of Life Demands for Athletes (DALDA) and/or Proﬁle of Mood States (POMS) were
     shown to be able to reﬂect functional overreaching, whereas changes in maximal oxygen uptake and HR-variability parameters
     were not. Conclusion: Functional overreaching within a maximal performance test was characterized by a decrease in peak PO
     and a lower maximum HR, whereas a lower mean PO and a lower HR were observed during time trials. Changes in parameters
     during a standardized submaximal test when functionally overreached were characterized by a higher PO at a ﬁxed HR or a lower
     HR at a ﬁxed intensity, higher rating of perceived exertion, and a faster HR recovery. Although both the DALDA and POMS
     were able to reﬂect functional overreaching, the POMS was not able to differentiate this response from acute fatigue, which
     makes it unsuitable for accurately monitoring functional overreaching.

     Keywords: monitoring, fatigue, cycling, running, triathlon, training prescription

     Athletes aim to improve their performance through ﬁnding                          status,4 fatigue is not, per deﬁnition, considered as a negative
the optimal balance between training load and recovery.1,2 As the                      response. However, if fatigue accumulates and an athlete is not
best gains in training response are generally achieved with high                       able to recover from a training stimulus, he or she can develop a
training load and the minimal but appropriate recovery time,                           state of functional overreaching, nonfunctional overreaching, or
athletes tend to balance on this ﬁne line between doing right and                      even a full-blown overtraining syndrome.4
doing too much.1,3,4 An effective training session is based not                              Although an athlete, in most cases, recovers from a training
only on the applied training stimulus but also on the recovery                         session within 24 to 72 hours, the recovery from a functional
response to this stimulus.5,6 However, this response to training                       overreaching status generally takes about 5 to 7 days.4 As the term
might vary substantially from athlete to athlete as the rate of                        “functional” already implies, overreaching to a certain extent,
recovery is inﬂuenced by the physiological and nutritional status                      which is followed by an extended period of recovery to allow
as well as the emotional balance and illnesses or injuries the                         the body to supercompensate, has proven to be an effective training
athlete needs to deal with.3,7,8 Therefore, monitoring the recovery                    regimen,5 and is commonly a target of a training camp.10 Substan-
status from training and, with this, trying to quantify the state of                   tially longer recovery periods are associated with nonfunctional
fatigue is very important.                                                             overreaching (weeks to months) and a full-blown overtraining
     Monitoring fatigue is complex as fatigue is a multifaceted                        syndrome (months to up to more than a year).4 As the latter 2
phenomenon with multiple deﬁnitions, making its precise mea-                           stages are associated with long-term adverse effects on perfor-
surement difﬁcult.9 Fatigue is frequently used as a positive                           mance, it is extremely important to be able to recognize symptoms
subjective marker of a training session as most sessions aim to                        of functional overreaching from which athletes can recover rela-
apply an overload stimulus. In other words, experiencing fatigue                       tively quickly and prevent the development of a nonfunctional
is part of training and is frequently used as a subjective assessor                    overreaching status. Although this is important for all athletes,
by an athlete to determine whether or not he or she has trained                        endurance athletes with high training loads11,12 seem to be at higher
“sufﬁciently.” or not. As acute fatigue is generally part of the                       risk of developing a nonfunctional overreaching status. As athletes
overload stimulus given to achieve an improvement in training                          tend to regularly use training techniques in which they aim to
                                                                                       functionally overreach themselves, the risk of developing a non-
                                                                                       functional overreaching status is relatively high.
Roete, Elferink-Gemser, and Stoter are with the Dept of Human Movement                       Although several papers have studied the effects of func-
Sciences, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Gronin-        tional overreaching on noninvasive parameters, no systematic
gen, the Netherlands. Otter is with the School of Sport Studies, Hanze University of   review to date has provided an overview of which noninvasive
Applied Sciences, Groningen, the Netherlands, and the Dept of Biomedical Sciences
                                                                                       markers are able to reﬂect a state of functional overreaching and
of Cells & Systems, Section Anatomy & Medical Physiology, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Stoter is
                                                                                       how much consensus there is between the different studies.
also with Innovation Lab Thialf, Heerenveen, the Netherlands. Lamberts is with the     Therefore, the aim of this systematic review is to provide an
Dept of Sport Science, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch           overview of which noninvasive fatigue markers are able to reﬂect
University, Stellenbosch, South Africa. Lamberts (rplam@hotmail.com) is corre-         a state of functional overreaching in trained to professional
sponding author.                                                                       endurance athletes.

1066      Roete et al

                           Methods                                       indicators of increased stress or fatigue levels.1,15,16 In addition,
                                                                         changes in performance parameters after a taper period and/or the
Data Sources                                                             duration of the overload period were assessed to conﬁrm the state of
                                                                         functional overreaching.
An electronic literature search was performed in the digital databases        After the initial online search, 373 abstracts were screened for
of PubMed, Scopus, and PsycINFO. The used search terms were              eligibility (see also Figure 1). Upon screening the abstracts, 40 full-
“monitoring” AND “fatigue” OR “fatigue” OR “overreaching” AND            text articles were downloaded and screened in detail for the inclusion
“athletes” ((monitoring [All Fields] AND (“fatigue” [MeSH Terms]         criteria, as mentioned earlier. Based on the strict criteria, 12 articles
OR “fatigue” [All Fields]) OR overreaching [All Fields] AND              were included as part of the current systematic review. Screening of
(“athletes” [MeSH Terms] OR “athletes” [All Fields])) AND English        the abstracts and articles was done independently by A.J.R. and
[Language]). In addition, the articles had to be in the English          R.P.L. Articles marked as “unsure of meeting the inclusion criteria”
language, in peer-reviewed scientiﬁc journals, and published between     or where there was a discrepancy between recommending it to be
January 2010 and January 2020. This search yielded 309 articles from     “included” or “excluded” were discussed in detail, after which a
PubMed and Scopus and 93 articles from PsycINFO (see Figure 1).          consensus was reached. The quality of the included papers was
                                                                         assessed independently by A.J.R. and R.P.L. and based on the level
Study Selection: Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria                        of evidence of the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine.17
                                                                         The Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine scale ranges from
After the duplicates were removed, the titles and abstracts of the       level 1a, reﬂecting a systematic review of high-quality randomized
articles were read independently by 2 of the authors (A.J.R. and         controlled trials, to level 5, reﬂecting an expert opinion.
R.P.L.). Inclusion criteria for the systematic review were: (1) stud-         Responses in parameters to a state of functional overreaching
ies that had used an overload training load model to induce              were grouped as responses in “physiological parameters,” in “heart
functional overreaching, (2) studies focusing on trained to profes-      rate parameters,” and in “subjective parameters.” Changes in
sional athletes (based on performance level 3–5 as deﬁned by De          parameters were based on a signiﬁcance (P < .05), not based on
Pauw et al13 for men and Decroix et al14 for women), (3) focused on      the likelihood that a change would be clinically relevant and not
noninvasive markers reﬂecting functional overreaching and,               based on Cohen effect sizes. If the change was signiﬁcant, the
(4) athletes displayed minimally 2 of the 3 indicators of being          amount of change in the parameter was expressed by the weighted
functionally overreached. To determine whether athletes were,            average, calculated as the percentage change per study multiplied
indeed, functionally overreached, the following indicators were          by the number of participants per study, which was then summated
used: (1) a decrease in performance,4 (2) increased rating of            for the same parameters and divided by the sum of participants of
perceived exertion (RPE) at the same intensity,2 and (3) subjective      those studies. As recommended,2 data from stage 1 of both the

Figure 1 — Flowchart of study selection in the systematic review.

                                                                                                           Detecting Functional Overreaching          1067

Lamberts submaximal cycle test (LSCT) and Lamberts submaxi-                        513% of normal training load. Only one study, by Hammes et al,18
mal running test (LSRT) were not included as part of the systematic                did not quantify the level of overload. All studies met at least 2 of
review based on the relatively high variability in these parameters                the 3 indicators of being functionally overreached, whereas 10
at this intensity.                                                                 studies also conﬁrmed the functional overreaching status by
                                                                                   showing a temporary performance decrease that improved again
                                                                                   after a taper period.
                                Results
The characteristics of the included studies are summarized in                      Physiological Parameters
Table 1. The level of evidence, based on the Oxford Centre for
Evidence-Based Medicine ranking system, ranged from 1b (5                          An overview of the physiological responses to functional over-
papers) to 2b (6 papers), whereas 1 paper was quantiﬁed as level                   reaching are shown in Table 2.
3b (see also Table 1). Six of the 12 included papers (50%) had a                       Five studies examined changes in VO2max during cycling or
control group that was either not fatigued (n = 3) or acutely                      running caused by the overload period.18–22
fatigued (n = 3) instead of functionally overreached. The average                      Seven cycling studies examined the change in power output
number of participants per study was 11 (6) and ranged from 1 to                   (PO) before and after the overload period. Changes in peak power
23 participants. In total, 136 participants within 12 different                    output (PPO) were studied in 4 papers,18,19,21,23 whereas mean PO
studies were included in this systematic review. Participants of                   during a time trial (TT) was studied in 3 papers.18,24,25 Submaximal
the studies were of a weighted average of 33 years with the                        PO while cycling at a ﬁxed heart rate (HR) was also studied in 3
average age ranging from 24 to 38 years. The studies focused on                    papers.10,18,26
cyclists (n = 5 [42%]), triathletes (n = 4 [33%]), long-distance
runners (n = 1 [8%]), a combination of cyclists and triathletes                    HR Parameters
(n = 1 [8%]), or on a combination of runners, cyclists, and
triathletes (n = 1 [8%]). The average training status per paper                    The overview of HR responses to functional overreaching are
varied from “trained (n = 5 [42%])” to “well-trained” (n = 4                       shown in Table 3.
[33%]) and to professional (n = 3 [25%]). The mean overload                             Ten studies examined a measure of HR and its change after the
of the interventions was 188% (99%) and ranged from 130% to                        period of overload. Three of the studies examined resting

Table 1         Characteristics of the Included Studies
                 Study design              N (sex)                  Training
Study            (evidence level)          [status]                 status               Sport(s)                Fatigue protocol
Lamberts         Case study (3b)           1 (M) [FO]               Professional         Cycling                 233% (1 wk) and 160% (1 wk) of normal
et al26                                                                                                          training load
Le Meur          Randomized controlled     8 (M) [C]                Trained to well-     Triathlon               3 wk—140% of normal weekly training
et al20          trial (1b)                13 (M) [FO]              trained                                      load
Dupuy            Cross-sectional (2b)      11 (M) [FO]              Trained              Cycling, triathlon, and 2 wk—200% of normal weekly training
et al22                                                                                  running                 load
Le Meur          Randomized controlled     11 (M) [C]               Trained              Triathlon               3 wk—130% of normal weekly training
et al19          trial (1b)                12 (M) [AF]                                                           load
                                           12 (M) [FO]
Aubry            Randomized controlled     10 (M) [C]               Trained to well-     Triathlon               3 wk—130% of normal weekly training
et al23          trial (1b)                11 (M) [AF]              trained                                      load
                                           10 (M) [FO]
Decroix          Cross-sectional (2b)      4 (F) [AF]               Professional         Cycling                 8-d training camp—149% of normal
et al24                                    5 (F) [FO]                                                            training load
Hammes           Cross-sectional (2b)      23 (M) [FO]              Trained              Cycling and triathlon   6 d of high-intensity and high-volume
et al18                                                                                                          traininga
Le Meur          Randomized controlled     8 (M) [C]                Trained              Triathlon               3 wk—140% of normal weekly training
et al28          trial (1b)                13 (M) [FO]                                                           load
Siegl et al27    Cross-sectional (2b)      11 (M) and 3 (F)         Trained to well-     Running                 56-km ultramarathon—513% of normal
                                           [FO]                     trained                                      daily training load
Coates           Randomized controlled     8 (M) and 5 (F) [C];     Trained              Cycling and triathlon   3 wk—150% of normal weekly training
et al21          trial (1b)                8 (M) and 7 (F) [FO]                                                  load
Decroix          Cross-sectional (2b)      6 (F) [FO]               Professional         Cycling                 8-d training camp—208% of normal
et al10                                                                                                          weekly training load
Woods            Cross-sectional (2b)      13 (M) [FO]              Trained to well-     Cycling                 2 wk—144% of normal weekly training
et al25                                                             trained                                      load
Abbreviations: AF, acute fatigue; C, control group; F, female; FO, functional overreaching; M, male.
a
  Percentage overload compared to the normal weekly training was not quantiﬁed.

1068     Roete et al

                  Table 2       Overview of Physiological Responses to Functional Overreaching
                  Variable                                                Duration                Change                Reference
                  VO2max
                    Maximal
                      Max cycle test
                        VO2max during max PPO test                        Max test                   ↓                  Le Meur et al19
                        VO2max during max PPO test                        Max test                   ↔                  Hammes et al18
                        VO2max during max PPO test                        Max test                   ↔                  Coates et al21
                      Max running test
                        VO2max during max PTRS test                       Max test                   ↔                  Dupuy et al22
                  PO
                    Submaximal
                      @80% HRmax
                        PO at 80% HRmax (LSCT)                            6 min                       ↑                 Lamberts et al26
                        PO at 80% HRmax (LSCT)                            6 min                       ↑                 Hammes et al18
                        PO at 80% HRmax (LSCT)                            6 min                       ↑                 Decroix et al10
                      @90% HRmax
                        PO at 90% HRmax (LSCT)                            3 min                    ↔ (↑b)               Lamberts et al26
                        PO at 90% HRmax (LSCT)                            3 min                     ↑                   Hammes et al18
                        PO at 90% HRmax (LSCT)                            3 min                    ↔ (↑a)               Decroix et al10
                      TT
                        Mean PO during 30-min TT                          30 min                      ↓                 Decroix et al24
                        Mean PO during 40-km TT                           ±65 min                     ↓                 Hammes et al18
                        Mean PO during 4-km TT                            ±5 min                      ↓                 Woods et al25
                    Maximal
                      PPO
                        PPO                                               Max test                   ↓                  Le Meur et al19
                        PPO                                               Max test                   ↓                  Aubry et al23
                        PPO                                               Max test                   ↔                  Hammes et al18
                        PPO                                               Max test                   ↓                  Coates et al21
                  Abbreviations: HR, heart rate; LSCT, Lambert submaximal cycle test; PO, power output; PPO, peak power output as part of a
                  maximal cycling test; PTRS, peak treadmill running speed as part of a maximal running test; TT, time trial.
                  a
                    Tendency. b Initial ﬁrst minute was higher but following 2 minutes the same.

HR.20,21,26 Nine studies examined the highest attained HR before                     Two studies examined the change in Daily Analysis of Life
and after the overload period, of which 3 examined the change at                Demands for Athletes (DALDA) before and after the overload
submaximal intensities24,25,27 and 6 at maximal intensities.18–23               period.26,27
     Six studies examined the change in HR recovery over 60 sec-                     Five studies examined the Proﬁle of Mood States (POMS)
onds and 4 studies assessed HRR after submaximal exercise18,26–28               questionnaires or subscales of the POMS questionnaire, from which
and 3 after maximal exercise.21,23,28 Four studies examined a                   2 studies examined the fatigue mood state,19,23 2 examined the energy
domain measure of heart rate variability (HRV). All 4 of those                  index,22,24 and 1 examined the total score of the POMS-2.21
studies examined the root mean square of successive differences of
the R–R intervals domain.20–22,25 Two studies examined the mean
of the SDs of all the normal-to-normal intervals,21,22 and 3 exam-
                                                                                                              Discussion
ined the low-/high-frequency ratio.20–22                                        An extensive literature search yielded 380 scientiﬁc articles; however,
                                                                                only 12 studies matched the strict selection criteria of focusing on
Subjective Parameters                                                           “trained to professional endurance athletes” and studying “noninva-
                                                                                sive markers of functional overreaching.” Although the strict criteria
An overview of the responses found in subjective rating markers is              limited the number of studies that were included for this systematic
shown in Table 4.                                                               review, it allowed us to compare the studies and provide the reader
    Seven studies assessed the RPE after the period of overload in              with an overview of noninvasive markers that are able to reﬂect a state
comparison with before the overload period. Four of those studies               of functional overreaching. In addition, this systematic review pro-
examined RPE at submaximal intensities during LSCT and/or                       vides valuable insight into how high the level of agreement is for the
LSRT tests,10,18,26,27 and 3 of the studies examined RPE at a                   different noninvasive markers that can reﬂect a state of functional
maximal intensity while running.20,22,28                                        overreaching. All papers quantiﬁed the percentage of overload except

Table 3    Overview of HR Responses to Functional Overreaching
Variable                                        Duration                                Change                      Reference
HR
 Resting HR
   HRrest supine—after waking upa               At wake-up                                 ↔                        Lamberts et al26
   HRrest supine—after exercisea                After 4 min                                ↔                        Le Meur et al20
   HRrest supine—before exercisea               After 5 min                                ↔                        Coates et al21
 Submax HR
   HR at 86% HRmax (LSRT)                       6 min                                       ↓                       Siegl et al27
   HR at 95% HRmax (LSRT)                       3 min                                       ↓                       Siegl et al27
 TT
   Mean HR during 30-min TT                     30 min                                      ↓                       Decroix et al24
   Mean HR during 4-km TT                       ±5 min                                      ↓                       Woods et al25
 Max HR
   Max cycle test
      HRmax during max PPO test                 Max test                                    ↓                       Le Meur et al19
      HRmax during max PPO test                 Max test                                    ↓                       Aubry et al23
      HRmax during max PPO test                 Max test                                    ↓                       Hammes et al18
      HRmax during max PPO test                 Max test                                    ↓                       Coates et al21
   Max running test
      HRmax during max PTrRS test               Max test                                    ↓                       Le Meur et al20
      HRmax during max PTRS test                Max test                                    ↓                       Dupuy et al22
HRR
   After submaximal intensity
      HRR after LSCT (90% HRmax)                60 s                                      ↑                         Lamberts et al26
      HRR after LSCT (90% HRmax)                60 s                                     ↔(↑b)                      Hammes et al18
      HRR during PTrRS test (61%–100%)          60 s                                      ↑                         Le Meur et al28
      HRR after LSRT (95% HRmax)                60 s                                      ↑                         Siegl et al27
   After maximal intensity
      HRR after max test                        60 s                                        ↑                       Aubry et al23
      HRR after max test                        60 s                                        ↑                       Le Meur et al28
      HRR after max test                        60 s                                        ↑                       Coates et al21
HRV
 Time domain
   RMSSD
      Ln RMSSD—supine—after week 1a             At wake-up                                 ↔                        Le Meur et al20
      Ln RMSSD—supine—after week 2a             At wake-up                                 ↔                        Le Meur et al20
      Ln RMSSD—supine—after week 3a             At wake-up                                 ↔                        Le Meur et al20
      Ln RMSSD—standing—after week 1a           At wake-up + 8 min                         ↔                        Le Meur et al20
      Ln RMSSD—standing—after week 2a           At wake-up + 8 min                         ↔                        Le Meur et al20
      Ln RMSSD—standing—after week 3a           At wake-up + 8 min                         ↔                        Le Meur et al20
      Ln RMSSD—supine                           After ≥ 5 min                              ↓                        Woods et al25
      RMSSD—during Stroop task                  During stroop test                         ↔                        Dupuy et al22
      RMSSD—supine—before exercise              After ≥ 5 min                              ↔                        Coates et al21
   SDNN
      SDNN—before exercise                      After ≥ 5 min                              ↔                        Coates et al21
      SDNN—during Stroop task                   During stroop test                         ↔                        Dupuy et al22
 Frequency domain
   LF/HF ratio
      LF/HF—supine—after week 1a                At wake-up                                 ↔                        Le Meur et al20
      LF/HF supine—after week 2a                At wake-up                                 ↔                        Le Meur et al20
      LF/HF supine—after week 3a                At wake-up                                 ↔                        Le Meur et al20
                                                                                                                          (continued)
                                            IJSPP Vol. 16, No. 8, 2021                                                              1069

1070       Roete et al

Table 3 (continued)
Variable                                                                 Duration                                    Change                          Reference
        LF/HF standing—after week 1a                                     At wake-up + 8 min                              ↔                           Le Meur et al20
        LF/HF standing—after week 2a                                     At wake-up + 8 min                              ↔                           Le Meur et al20
        LF/HF standing—after week 3a                                     At wake-up + 8 min                              ↔                           Le Meur et al20
        LF/HF—during stroop test                                         During stroop test                              ↔                           Dupuy et al22
        LF/HF—before exercise                                            After ≥ 5 min                                   ↔                           Coates et al21
Abbreviations: HR, heart rate; HRR, HR recovery; HRV, HR variability; LF/HF, low- to high-frequency ratio; LSCT, Lambert submaximal cycle test; PPO, peak power
output as part of a maximal cycling test; PTrRS, peak track running speed; PTRS, peak treadmill running speed as part of a maximal running test; RMSSD, root mean square
of successive differences of the R–R intervals; SDNN, SD of normal-to-normal intervals; TT, time trial.
a
  Isolated daily values. b Change was reported to be clinically relevant.

                       Table 4 Overview of Subjective Rating Markers (RPE, DALDA, and POMS) to
                       Functional Overreaching
                       Variable                                         Duration                    Change                    Reference
                       RPE
                         @ 80% HRmax
                            RPE at 80% HRmax                            6 min                           ↑                     Lamberts et al26
                            RPE at 80% HRmax                            6 min                           ↑                     Hammes et al18
                            RPE at 80% HRmax                            6 min                           ↑                     Decroix et al10
                         @ 90% HRmax
                            RPE at 90% HRmax                            3 min                           ↑                     Lamberts et al26
                            RPE at 90% HRmax                            3 min                           ↑                     Hammes et al18
                            RPE at 90% HRmax                            3 min                           ↑                     Decroix et al10
                         @ 70% PTRS
                            RPE at 86% HRmax                            6 min                          ↔                      Siegl et al27
                         @ 85% PTRS
                            RPE at 95% HRmax                            3 min                          ↑                      Siegl et al27
                            RPE at PTrRS                                Max test                       ↔                      Le Meur et al20
                         @ 100% PTRS
                            RPE at PTRS                                 Max test                       ↔                      Dupuy et al22
                            RPE at PTrRS                                Max test                       ↑                      Le Meur et al28
                       DALDA
                         DALDA                                          90–120 s                   ↑ (part B)                 Lamberts et al26
                         DALDA                                          90–120 s                   ↑ (part B)                 Siegl et al27
                       POMS
                         Fatigue subscale
                         POMS (65)—before testing                       5–15 min                        ↑                     Le Meur et al19
                         POMS (65)—before testing                       5–15 min                        ↑                     Aubry et al23
                       Energy index
                         POMS (65)—before testing                       5–15 min                        ↓                     Dupuy et al22
                         POMS (32)—before testing                       2–8 min                         ↓                     Decroix et al24
                       Total score
                         POMS-2 (65)—after testing                      5–15 min                        ↑                     Coates et al21
                       Abbreviations: DALDA, Daily Analysis of Life Demands for Athletes; POMS, Proﬁle of Mood States; HR, heart rate;
                       PTrRS, peak track running speed; PTRS, peak treadmill running speed as part of a maximal running test; RPE, rating of
                       perceived exertion.

for the study by Hammes et al,18 which makes interpreting the                         were captured as part of a maximal cycling test. Of the 4 studies,
ﬁndings of this study slightly more difﬁcult.                                         3 showed no change, and only 1 study reported a signiﬁcantly
                                                                                      lower VO2max value.20 The absence of change in VO2max in-
                                                                                      dicates that this noninvasive marker has a low sensitivity to reﬂect a
Physiological Parameters
                                                                                      state functional overreaching. The low sensitivity can partially be
VO2max. VO2max was studied in 4 papers, of which 1 was                                explained by a relatively high associated measurement error
determined during a maximal incremental running test and 3                            (1.9%–2.7%) of VO2max.29 In addition, multiple studies have

                                                                                                 Detecting Functional Overreaching           1071

shown that although a high VO2max is important for endurance                 Maximal HR was studied in 6 papers. In 4 studies, HRmax was
athletes, the predictive value of VO2max to predict performance of      determined based on a maximal cycle test,18,19,21,28 whereas the
well-trained endurance athletes is limited.30                           HRmax in 2 other studies was determined based on a maximal
Power Output. Changes in cycling PO as a marker of functional           running test.20,22 In line with the submaximal HR ﬁndings, maximal
overreaching were studied in 7 papers. Of these 7 papers, 4 studied     HR also decreased with functional overreaching in all studies. The
PPO, 3 studies studied mean PO during a TT, and 3 studies examined      overall observed weighted decrease in HRmax with functional over-
submaximal PO at a ﬁxed HR. Three of the 4 papers that looked at        reaching was 5.2%. In further support and in contrast to the athletes
PPO showed a decrease in PPO when athletes were functionally            who were functionally overreached, 2 studies showed no change in
overreached.19,21,28 In contrast, Hammes et al18 reported no signiﬁ-    HRmax in athletes with acute fatigue,19,23 whereas 4 studies showed
cant change in PPO but did indicate that the “lower” PPO had an         no change in the athletes in the control group.19–21,23
86% likelihood of being clinically relevant. In line with lower PPO,         Seven studies examined the sensitivity of HRR as a marker for
Woods et al25 reported lower cycling sprints POs over 15 seconds        functional overreaching. Four papers studied changes in HRR after
with a state of functional overreaching. The mean weighted average      a ﬁxed submaximal intensity,18,26–28 and 3 studies looked at HRR
decrease in PPO in the studies was 2.8% in athletes who were            after a maximal performance test. In total, 6 of the 7 studies
functionally overreached. Two studies that also studied athletes with   reported a faster HRR with functional overreaching. The study
“acute fatigue” reported conﬂicting PPO ﬁndings (no change in           by Hammes et al18 reported a 91% likelihood that the mean increase
PPO19; increase in PPO23), whereas in the control groups no changes     of 8 beats (range from 2 to 14) was clinically relevant; however,
in PPO were observed.19,23                                              this was not reported as being signiﬁcantly higher. Nonetheless,
     All 3 papers studying changes in TT performance reported a         overall, a faster HRR after high submaximal or maximal intensity
lower mean PO when being functionally overreached.18,24,25 The          seems to be a sensitive marker of functional overreaching with an
average weighted decrease in mean PO was 4.4%. However, this            average weighted observed change of 13.7%. In contrast to func-
percentage needs to be interpreted with care as the TT distance         tionally overreached athletes, 1 study reported no change in HRR in
within the different studies varied from 4 to 40 km. In further         athletes with acute fatigue,23 whereas 3 studies reported no change
support, Decroix et al24 showed that in contrast to the functionally    in HRR in their control group.21,23,28
overreached athletes, athletes with acute fatigue had no change in           Changes in HRV as a marker of functional overreaching were
mean PO during the TT.                                                  studied in 5 papers.20–22,25 Within the time domain, (ln) root mean
     Studies looking at submaximal PO when riding at a ﬁxed HR          square of successive differences of the R–R intervals was most
showed to be higher in all of 3 studies when cycling at 80%             commonly studied, whereas 2 papers also looked at SD of normal-
HRmax,10,18,26 whereas 1 study18 also showed this when riding at        to-normal intervals. Within the frequency domain, low-frequency,
90% of HRmax, and 2 other papers10,26 showed a tendency of being        high-frequency, and the low-/high-frequency ratio were most
higher with being functionally overreached. The submaximal              commonly studied. In contrast to HRR, HRV showed no change
intensities showed a weighted increase of 15.5% at 80% HRmax            with a state of functional overreaching in all studies except for
and 5.8% at 90% of HRmax.                                               Woods et al,25 who reported a decrease ln root mean square of
                                                                        successive differences of the R–R intervals values. However, the
HR Parameters. All included studies examined HR-derived
                                                                        overall ﬁndings of this systematic review indicate that HRV
markers of functional overreaching, which ranged from resting,
                                                                        markers do not seem to be sensitive enough to reﬂect a state of
submaximal, and maximal HR to HR recovery and HR variability.
                                                                        functional overreaching.
     All 3 papers that examined resting HR20,21,26 showed that
resting HR does not change with a state of functional overreaching
in endurance athletes. One study by Le Meur et al20 showed a slight     Subjective Parameters
decrease in resting HR in week 2 but only when resting HRs of a
                                                                        Rating of Perceived Exertion. RPE was studied in 7 papers, of
week were averaged, whereas daily changes in resting HR were
                                                                        which 4 studies looked at changes in RPE at submaximal inten-
nonsigniﬁcant.
                                                                        sity,10,18,26,27 and 3 papers looked at changes in RPE at termination
     Changes in submaximal HR as a marker of functional over-
                                                                        of a maximal running test.20,22,28
reaching was investigated in 3 papers. Two papers studied changes
                                                                             Submaximal RPE while cycling at 80% and 90% of HRmax
in submaximal HR during a TT,24,25 which showed, on average, a
                                                                        increased with functional overreaching in all 3 LSCT studies.10,18,26 In
3.3% weighted decrease of the mean HR. In addition, Decroix
                                                                        line with this, Siegl et al27 showed an increased RPE with functional
et al24 reported that in contrast to the functionally overreached
                                                                        overreaching while running at 85% of peak treadmill running speed
athletes, no changes in submaximal HR values were found in
                                                                        (PTRS); however, the change at 70% of PTRS was not signiﬁcant.
athletes with acute fatigue.
                                                                        The studies reported a change of a weighted average of 21%.
     In line with the TT paper, Siegl et al,27 who studied changes in
                                                                             RPE after a maximal test was only shown to be higher in 1 of
submaximal HR when running at a ﬁxed speed, also reported lower
                                                                        the 3 papers20 that studied this. The reason for not ﬁnding changes
submaximal HR (2.4%–3.4%) in athletes who were functionally
                                                                        in RPE levels after a maximal performance can very likely be
overreached.27 This ﬁnding suggests that the decrease in HR in the
                                                                        explained by the nature of a maximal test, which if conducted
TT can likely not be all contributed to the lower mean PO that was
                                                                        correctly, should always result in a maximal or near maximal RPE
also reported in these studies.
                                                                        score. In further support, 2 studies reported no change in RPE
     The ﬁndings of Siegl et al,27 who used a ﬁxed submaximal
                                                                        values in the control group.20,28
intensity protocol (LSRT), are in line with the ﬁxed HR-based
submaximal studies (LSCT) of Lamberts et al,26 Hammes et al,18          Daily Analysis of Life Demands for Athletes. Two papers as-
and Decroix et al.10 Whereas Siegl et al27 reports a lower submaxi-     sessed changes in the DALDA questionnaire in athletes who were
mal HR at the same intensity, Lamberts et al,26 Hammes et al,18 and     functionally overreached.26,27 Both studies showed an increase
Decroix et al10 all report increased PO at the same submaximal HR,      in “a” scores (“worse than normal”) in part B of the DALDA
which is physiologically correct and in line with each other.           questionnaire. This reﬂects an increase in the number of symptoms

1072      Roete et al

of stress (part B), whereas the number of sources of stress (part A)          Several studies used a standardized submaximal test, which
remained the same. The average weighted increase in “a” scores           was either clamped on HR (LSCT) or intensity (LSRT). These
with functional overreaching was 60%.                                    studies showed an increased PO at a ﬁxed HR10,18,26 or a lower HR
                                                                         at a ﬁxed intensity,27 a faster HRR,18,21,23,26–28 and increased RPE
Proﬁle of Mood States. Changes in POMS or a subscale of the
                                                                         levels.10,18,20,22,26–28
POMS scores were studied in 5 papers. Within these, 2 papers
                                                                              The DALDA and POMS questionnaire were both shown to be
focused on changes in fatigue mood state,19,23 whereas 2 papers
                                                                         able to reﬂect a state of functional overreaching. However, the
focused on changes in energy index,22,24 and 1 paper looked at
                                                                         subscales of “fatigue mood status” and “energy index” were not
changes in total score of the POMS-2 questionnaire.21 In all papers,
                                                                         able to differentiate between acute fatigue and functional over-
poorer POMS scores were observed with functional overreaching,
                                                                         reaching, which makes POMS not valuable as a monitoring tool for
which means that fatigue mood states were higher, the energy index
                                                                         functional overreaching.
was lower, and the total POMS-2 score was lower. In further
                                                                              Although both maximal performance tests and TTs have been
support, 2 studies reported no changes in fatigue mood state scores
                                                                         shown to be able to reﬂect a state of functional overreaching, they
in their control groups,19,23 and Coates et al21 reported unchanged
                                                                         might be less practical to perform on a regular basis than a short
POMS-2 scores in their control group. However, 2 studies reported
                                                                         submaximal test that also can be used a standardized warm-up
higher fatigue mood state scores in athletes with acute fatigue,19,23
                                                                         method.
and 1 study reported a lower energy index in athletes with acute
fatigue.24
     Interesting to note is that some of the observed responses                            Practical Applications
within “power” and “heart rate” are counterintuitive, such as higher
PO at the same HR and lower HR at the same intensity and faster          The ﬁndings of this systematic review provide a unique overview
HRRs. These counterintuitive responses can likely be explained by        of which parameters change with a state of functional overreaching
increased parasympathetic activity31 together with decreased sym-        and how much consensus there is about these markers. This
pathetic activity32,33 as well as increased concentrations of circu-     information is highly valuable for coaches and trainers when
lating free catecholamines33 and an increased plasma volume,             monitoring and ﬁne-tuning the training prescription of their endur-
which will reduce beta–adrenergic receptor sensitivity27 and might       ance athletes. A state of functional overreaching can not only be
result in a lower PO at the same submaximal HR or an increased PO        reﬂected by a maximal performance test or a TT but also by using a
at the same submaximal HR.                                               standardized submaximal test protocol, which might be beneﬁcial
     Important to note is that when these responses are interpreted      for monitoring athletes on a regular basis.
without the knowledge of increased RPE and fatigue levels, they
could also be interpreted as indicators of a “positive” training
response and stimulate a coach or athlete to keep on training too                                    References
hard. Therefore, a multifactorial approach is crucial for the correct
interpretation of monitoring data.                                         1. Kellmann M. Preventing overtraining in athletes in high-intensity
     The limitations of this study were that strict selection criteria        sports and stress/recovery monitoring. Scand J Med Sci Sport.
had to be used, which has limited the number of papers that could             2010;20(suppl 2):95–102. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0838.2010.01192.x
be included in this review. In addition, the systematic review has         2. Lamberts RP. The Development of an Evidence-Based Submaximal
focused speciﬁcally on trained to professional endurance athletes;            Cycle Test Designed to Monitor and Predict Cycling Performance:
and therefore, the ﬁndings might differ for less trained or none-             The Lamberts and Lambert Submaximal Cycle Test (LSCT). En-
ndurance athletes. Interesting to note was that all papers focused on         schede, The Netherlands: Ipskamp Drukkers; 2009.
adult athletes, whereas no papers studied youth athletes. As young         3. Halson SL. Monitoring training load to understand fatigue in athletes.
talented athletes have less experience with training load and                 Sport Med. 2014;44:139–147. doi:10.1007/s40279-014-0253-z
recovery and might experience high peer pressure to perform                4. Meeusen R, Duclos M, Foster C, et al. Prevention, diagnosis, and
optimally,34 they might be at a relatively high risk of overreaching.         treatment of the overtraining syndrome: Joint consensus statement of
Therefore, future research should also focus on identifying markers           the European college of sport science and the American College
of functional overreaching in younger athletes.                               of Sports Medicine. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2013;45(1):186–205.
                                                                              PubMed ID: 23247672 doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e318279a10a
                                                                           5. Mujika I. Tapering and Peaking for Optimal Performance. Cham-
                         Conclusion                                           paign, IL: Human Kinetics Publishers; 2009.
                                                                           6. Jeukendrup AE. High-Performance Cycling. Champaign, IL: Human
In conclusion, the ﬁndings of this systematic review indicate that a          Kinetics Publishers; 2002.
state of functional overreaching in trained to professional endurance      7. Kellmann M, Bertollo M, Bosquet L, et al. Recovery and performance
athletes is reﬂected by changes in PO, submaximal HR, maximal                 in sport: consensus statement. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2018;
HR, and HRR as well as RPE, DALDA, and POMS scores.                           13(2):240–245. PubMed ID: 29345524 doi:10.1123/ijspp.2017-0759
     Functional overreaching when performing a maximal perfor-             8. Bourdon PC, Cardinale M, Murray A, et al. Monitoring athlete
mance test18–23 was reﬂected by a lower PPO and lower maximum                 training loads: consensus statement. Int J Sports Physiol Perform.
HR as well as a faster HRR. Interestingly, no papers studied the              2017;12(suppl 2):161–170. doi:10.1123/IJSPP.2017-0208
effect of functional overreaching on maximal running speed. Both           9. Kluger BM, Krupp LB, Enoka RM. Fatigue and fatigability in
VO2max and RPE levels did not change with the status of being                 neurologic illnesses: proposal for a uniﬁed taxonomy. Neurology.
functionally overreached.                                                     2013;80(4):409–416. PubMed ID: 23339207 doi:10.1212/WNL.
     Changes during a TT when functionally overreached18,24,25                0b013e31827f07be
were reﬂected by a poorer performance (lower mean PO) and a               10. Decroix L, Lamberts RP, Meeusen R. Can the lamberts and lambert
lower submaximal HR.                                                          submaximal cycle test reﬂect overreaching in professional cyclists?

                                                                                                      Detecting Functional Overreaching           1073

    Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2018;13(1):23–28. PubMed ID:                23. Aubry A, Hausswirth C, Louis J, Coutts AJ, Buchheit M, Le Meur Y.
    28422523 doi:10.1123/ijspp.2016-0685                                          The development of functional overreaching is associated with a
11. van Erp T, Sanders D, de Koning JJ. Training characteristics of male          faster heart rate recovery in endurance athletes. PLoS One. 2015;
    and female professional road cyclists: a 4-year retrospective analysis.       10(10):e0139754. PubMed ID: 26488766 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
    Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2019;15(4):534–540. doi:10.1123/                0139754
    ijspp.2019-0320                                                           24. Decroix L, Piacentini MF, Rietjens G, Meeusen R. Monitoring
12. Sultana F, Abbiss CR, Louis J, Bernard T, Hausswirth C, Brisswalter           physical and cognitive overload during a training camp in profes-
    J. Age-related changes in cardio-respiratory responses and muscular           sional female cyclists. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2016;11(7):933–
    performance following an Olympic triathlon in well-trained triath-            939. PubMed ID: 26816388 doi:10.1123/ijspp.2015-0570
    letes. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2012;112(4):1549–1556. PubMed ID:              25. Woods AL, Rice AJ, Garvican-Lewis LA, et al. The effects of
    21853306 doi:10.1007/s00421-011-2115-9                                        intensiﬁed training on resting metabolic rate (RMR), body composi-
13. De Pauw K, Roelands B, Cheung SS, De Geus B, Rietjens G,                      tion and performance in trained cyclists. PLoS One. 2018;13(2):
    Meeusen R. Guidelines to classify subject groups in sport-science             e0191644. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0191644
    research. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2013;8(2):111–122. PubMed         26. Lamberts RP, Rietjens GJ, Tijdink HH, Noakes TD, Lambert MI.
    ID: 23428482 doi:10.1123/ijspp.8.2.111                                        Measuring submaximal performance parameters to monitor fatigue
14. Decroix L, De Pauw K, Foster C, Meeusen R. Guidelines to classify             and predict cycling performance: a case study of a world-class cyclo-
    female subject groups in sport-science research. Int J Sports Physiol         cross cyclist. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2010;108(1):183–190. PubMed ID:
    Perform. 2016;11(2):204–213. PubMed ID: 26182438 doi:10.1123/                 19921241 doi:10.1007/s00421-009-1291-3
    ijspp.2015-0153                                                           27. Siegl A, Kösel EM, Tam N, et al. Submaximal markers of fatigue and
15. Rushall BS. A tool for measuring stress tolerance in elite athletes. J        overreaching; implications for monitoring athletes. Int J Sports Med.
    Appl Sport Psychol. 1990;2(1):51–66. doi:10.1080/1041320900840                2017;38(09):675–682. doi:10.1055/s-0043-110226
    6420                                                                      28. Le Meur Y, Buchheit M, Aubry A, Coutts AJ, Hausswirth C.
16. McNair DM, Lorr M, Droppleman LF. Proﬁle of Mood States Manual.               Assessing overreaching with heart-rate recovery: what is the mini-
    San Diego, CA: Educational and Industrial Testing Service; 1971.              mal exercise intensity required? Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2017;
17. Howick J. Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine: Levels                   12(4):569–573. PubMed ID: 27617566 doi:10.1123/ijspp.2015-
    of Evidence (March 2009)—Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine                   0675
    (CEBM), University of Oxford. https://www.cebm.ox.ac.uk/                  29. Lamberts RP, Swart J, Woolrich RW, Noakes TD, Lambert MI.
    resources/levels-of-evidence/oxford-centre-for-evidence-%0A353                Measurement error associated with performance testing in well-
    based-medicine-levels-of-evidence-march-2009. 2009. Accessed                  trained cyclists: application to the precision of monitoring changes
    November 10, 2020.                                                            in training status. Int SportMed J. 2009;10(1):33–44.
18. Hammes D, Skorski S, Schwindling S, et al. Can the lamberts and           30. Bassett DR, Howley ET. Limiting factors for maximum oxygen
    lambert submaximal cycle test indicate fatigue and recovery in trained        uptake and determinants of endurance performance. Med Sci Sports
    cyclists? Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2016;11(3):328–336. doi:10.           Exerc. 2000;32(1):70–84. PubMed ID: 10647532 doi:10.1097/
    1123/ijspp.2015-0119                                                          00005768-200001000-00012
19. Le Meur Y, Louis J, Aubry A, et al. Maximal exercise limitation           31. Pichot V, Busso T, Roche F, et al. Autonomic adaptations to intensive
    in functionally overreached triathletes: role of cardiac adrenergic           and overload training periods: a laboratory study. Med Sci Sports
    stimulation. J Appl Physiol. 2014;117(3):214–222. PubMed ID:                  Exerc. 2002;34(10):1660–1666. PubMed ID: 12370569 doi:10.1097/
    24925979 doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00191.2014                                  00005768-200210000-00019
20. Le Meur Y, Pichon A, Schaal K, et al. Evidence of parasympathetic         32. Robinson BF, Epstein SE, Beiser GD, Braunwald E. Control of
    hyperactivity in functionally overreached athletes. Med Sci Sports            heart rate by the autonomic nervous system. Studies in man on the
    Exerc. 2013;45(11):2061–2071. PubMed ID: 24136138 doi:10.1249/                interrelation between baroreceptor mechanisms and exercise. Circ
    MSS.0b013e3182980125                                                          Res. 1966;19(2):400–411. PubMed ID: 5914852 doi:10.1161/01.
21. Coates AM, Hammond S, Burr JF. Investigating the use of pre-                  RES.19.2.400
    training measures of autonomic regulation for assessing functional        33. Lehmann M, Foster C, Dickhuth HH, Gastmann U. Autonomic
    overreaching in endurance athletes. Eur J Sport Sci. 2018;18(7):965–          imbalance hypothesis and overtraining syndrome. Med Sci Sports
    974. PubMed ID: 29635969 doi:10.1080/17461391.2018.1458907                    Exerc. 1998;30:1140–1145. PubMed ID: 9662686 doi:10.1097/
22. Dupuy O, Lussier M, Fraser S, Bherer L, Audiffren M, Bosquet L.               00005768-199807000-00019
    Effect of overreaching on cognitive performance and related cardiac       34. Caine D, Walch T, Sabato T. The elite young athlete: strategies to
    autonomic control. Scand J Med Sci Sport. 2014;24(1):234–242.                 ensure physical and emotional health. Open Access J Sport Med.
    doi:10.1111/j.1600-0838.2012.01465.x                                          2016;7:99–113. doi:10.2147/oajsm.s96821

